# SparseViz Documentation

## Introduction

Welcome to the documentation of SparseViz, a comprehensive library
designed for efficient and intuitive handling of sparse data structures.
In the realm of data processing and analysis, sparse data structures are
pivotal for managing datasets with predominantly empty or zero-valued
elements. SparseViz emerges as a versatile tool, bridging the gap
between the complexity of sparse data operations and the need for a
user-friendly approach.

## Core Principle

SparseViz is built upon the principle of simplifying the interaction
with sparse data structures. Whether you are a data scientist, a
researcher, or a developer working with large, sparse datasets,
SparseViz offers a suite of functionalities that cater to your needs.
This library not only facilitates the efficient representation and
manipulation of sparse data but also extends its capabilities to various
operations such as implementing orderings, executing kernels, and
visualizing them. Moreover, SparseViz is not just a tool; it's a
growing ecosystem. We've designed it with extensibility in mind,
allowing for continuous development and integration of new features and
methods.

## Key Features of SparseViz

As indicated, SparseViz is not just a tool; it is a dynamic and
expanding ecosystem thoughtfully crafted to cater to a wide range of
applications involving sparse data structures. Its capabilities are
diverse and powerful, designed to address the various challenges and
needs encountered in working with sparse data. Here are the key features
that make SparseViz an indispensable library:

-   Representation of Sparse Data Structures: SparseViz excels in the
    efficient handling and representation of sparse matrices and
    tensors, making it easier to work with large, sparse datasets.

-   Comprehensive Operations: The library supports a broad spectrum of
    operations on sparse data structures. From basic manipulations to
    more complex transformations, SparseViz ensures that these
    operations are both efficient and intuitive.

-   Flexible Ordering Systems: SparseViz allows for customizable
    ordering of sparse data structures. This feature is particularly
    useful for optimizing data (to increase cache-hit) for specific
    algorithms or processing techniques.

-   Kernel Execution: With SparseViz, users can execute their customized
    kernels on sparse data. This functionality is essential for
    understanding the efficiency of the implemented orderings in
    practical terms.

-   Efficient Storage Solutions: The library offers optimized storage
    solutions for sparse data. This ensures that large datasets are not
    only stored efficiently but are also easily retrievable for future
    use.

-   Advanced Visualization Tools: One of the standout features of
    SparseViz is its capability to visualize sparse data structures.
    This tool is invaluable for understanding complex data patterns and
    for communicating findings in a clear and impactful way.

## Extensibility

At SparseViz, we encourage and support our users to not only use the
existing functionalities but to also contribute to the library's growth
by implementing their orderings, writing custom kernels, and extending
the library in various ways. To facilitate this, we have established a
robust infrastructure that allows for seamless customization and
extension. There are four primary ways you can customize and extend the
library:

1.  Adding Matrix Ordering

2.  Adding Tensor Ordering

3.  Adding Matrix Kernels

    3.1.  Adding CPU Matrix Kernels

    3.2.  Adding GPU Matrix Kernels

4.  Adding Tensor Kernels

    4.1.  Adding CPU Tensor Kernels

    4.2.  Adding GPU Tensor Kernels

Before delving into the specifics of each extension method, we will
first introduce you to the config file. The config file is a crucial
component of SparseViz, allowing for tailored library configuration and
setup. Understanding its role and usage is key to effectively extending
and customizing SparseViz.